# How to start JIT-ting

## Premise

Most developers heard about JIT compilers and how they can make slow interpreted
languages run at a speed, comparable to native code. However, not many people
understand how exactly this JIT thing works, and even less people could
write their own compilers.

I think having at least, basic knowledge of compiler internals may greatly
improve understanding of the code that is running on that software.

In this article, we'll visit some peaks of JIT-island, and probably even
implement a compiler ourselves!

## What we'll start with

Knowing some compiler basics, we can assume that every compiler is
transforming input in some format (usually, a source code) into the output in
another or same format (usually, a machine code). JIT compilers are not an
exception.

What really makes them exceptional, is the fact that they're running not ahead
of time (like gcc, clang and others), but Just-In-Time (i.e. right before
executing compiler's output).

To start developing our own JIT compiler we'll need to select the input language
for it. Considering [TOP GITHUB LANGUAGES FOR 2013 (SO FAR)][0], JavaScript
seems like a good candidate for implementing some limited subset of
it with simplified semantics. Even more, we'll implement JIT compiler in the
JavaScript itself. You can call it META-META!

## AST

Our compiler will accept JavaScript source code as its input, and produce (and
immediately execute) machine code for the very popular X64 platform. But, while
its pretty comfortable for humans to work with a textual representation,
compiler developers are usually tending to create multiple Intermediate
Representations (IR) before generating the final machine code.

Since we're writing simplified compiler, having only one IR should be enough for
us, and I'll choose Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) representation for this purposes.

Getting AST out of JavaScript code is really easy nowadays, and we can choose
any (of dozens) library we like: [esprima][1], [uglify-js][1], etc. Just to be
on one page with me, I recommend you to choose [esprima][1]. It has a nice and
well defined [output format][3].

For example, this code: `obj.method(42)` will produce the following AST (using
`esprima.parse("...")`):

```javascript
{ type: 'Program',
  body:
   [ { type: 'ExpressionStatement',
       expression:
        { type: 'CallExpression',
          callee:
           { type: 'MemberExpression',
             computed: false,
             object: { type: 'Identifier', name: 'obj' },
             property: { type: 'Identifier', name: 'method' } },
          arguments: [ { type: 'Literal', value: 42 } ] } } ] }
```

## Machine code

Let's summarize: we have JavaScript source (_check_), its AST (_check_), and we
want to get machine code for it.

If you're already familiar with assembly language then you can skip this
chapter, as it contains only basic introductionary material on this topic.
However, if you're new to it, reading next chapter may be hard without learning
some basics first. So please stay here, it won't take too long!

Assembly language is the nearest textual representation of the binary code that
your CPU(s) understand and is(are) able to run. Considering that processors are
executing code by reading and running instructions one-by-one, it may seem
logical to you that almost every line in assembly program represent an
instruction:

```asm
mov rax, 1    ; Put 1 into the register named `rax`
mov rbx, 2    ; Put 2 into the register named `rbx`
add rax, rbx  ; Calculate sum of `rax` and `rbx` and put it into `rax`
```

This program's output (assuming you'll get it from `rax` register) is 3. And,
as you've probably already figured out, it puts some data in some CPU slots
([registers][4]) and asks the CPU to calculate the sum of them.

Usually processors have enough registers to store results of intermediate
operations, but in some situations you may want to store/load data (and work
with it) from the computer's memory:

```asm
mov rax, 1
mov [rbp-8], rbx  ; Save rbx register into a stack slot
mov rbx, 2
add rax, rbx
mov rbx, [rbp-8]  ; Restore rbx register from a stack slot
```

Registers have names, memory slots have addresses. These addresses are usually
written using `[...]` syntax. For example, `[rbp-8]` means: take the value of
the `rbp` register, subtract `8`, and access a memory slot using the resulting
value as the address.

You can see that we're using `rbp` register here. `rbp` usually contains
address at which on-stack variables storage (i.e. variables that are stored in
current procedure's [stack][5]) starts; `8` is a size of `rbx` register (and any
other register, prefixed with `r`), and since the [stack][5] is growing upwards,
we need to subtract it from `rbp` to get a free address slot for our purposes.

There are many more nuances of programming at such a low level, and
unfortunately I'm not going to cover all of them here. Also, please be aware
that I gave you a very shallow description, and what actually happens here may
sometimes be much more complex.

Knowing things mentioned above should be enough to proceed to the code
generation.

## Code generation

Implementing the entire JavaScript is a rather complicated practice, so we'll
implement only a simplified arithmetics engine for now. (Which should be as fun
as getting to the whole thing later!)

The best and the easiest way to do it, is to traverse the AST using
[Depth First Search][6], generating machine code for each node. You might wonder
how could you generate machine code in a memory-safe language like JavaScript.
That's where I'm going to introduce you to [jit.js][7].

It is a node.js module (and C++ addon, actually) capable of generating and
execution of machine code, using assembly-like JavaScript syntax:

```javascript
var jit = require('jit.js');

var fn = jit.compile(function() {
  this.Proc(function() {
    this.mov('rax', 42);
    this.Return();
  });
});
console.log(fn());  // 42
```

## Let's write it

Thus only one thing left now, a module to traverse the AST tree, generated by
[esprima][1]. Thankfully, considering its structure and our minimalistic
compiler design it should be pretty easy.

We're going to support:

1. Number literals (`{ type: 'Literal', value: 123 }`)
2. Binary expression, with operators: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`
   (`{ type: 'BinaryExpression', operator: '+', left: ... , right: .... }`)
3. Unary expression, with the `-` operator
   (`{ type: 'UnaryExpression', operator: '-', argument: ... }`)

All these operations are performed on integers, so don't expect it to work
properly with values like `0.5`, `0.66666`, etc.

While processing expression, we'll be visiting each supported AST node of it,
generating code that returns it's result in the `rax` register. Sounds easy,
right? The only rule here is that we should keep all other registers clean
after leaving the AST node. Which, in other words, means that we should save all
registers that are used and restore them after they're not needed anymore.
Fortunately, CPUs have two magic instructions `push` and `pop` that can help us
with that task.

Here is the resulting code with descriptive comments:

```javascript
var jit = require('jit.js'),
    esprima = require('esprima'),
    assert = require('assert');

var ast = esprima.parse(process.argv[2]);

// Compile
var fn = jit.compile(function() {
  // This will generate default entry boilerplate
  this.Proc(function() {
    visit.call(this, ast);

    // The result should be in 'rax' at this point

    // This will generate default exit boilerplate
    this.Return();
  });
});

// Execute
console.log(fn());

function visit(ast) {
  if (ast.type === 'Program')
    visitProgram.call(this, ast);
  else if (ast.type === 'Literal')
    visitLiteral.call(this, ast);
  else if (ast.type === 'UnaryExpression')
    visitUnary.call(this, ast);
  else if (ast.type === 'BinaryExpression')
    visitBinary.call(this, ast);
  else
    throw new Error('Unknown ast node: ' + ast.type);
}

function visitProgram(ast) {
  assert.equal(ast.body.length,
               1,
               'Only one statement programs are supported');
  assert.equal(ast.body[0].type, 'ExpressionStatement');
  visit.call(this, ast.body[0].expression);
}

function visitLiteral(ast) {
  assert.equal(typeof ast.value, 'number');
  assert.equal(ast.value | 0,
               ast.value,
               'Only integer numbers are supported');

  this.mov('rax', ast.value);
}

function visitBinary(ast) {
  // Preserve 'rbx' after leaving the AST node
  this.push('rbx');

  // Visit right side of expresion
  visit.call(this, ast.right);

  // Move it to 'rbx'
  this.mov('rbx', 'rax');

  // Visit left side of expression (the result is in 'rax')
  visit.call(this, ast.left);

  //
  // So, to conclude, we've left side in 'rax' and right in 'rbx'
  //

  // Execute binary operation
  if (ast.operator === '+') {
    this.add('rax', 'rbx');
  } else if (ast.operator === '-') {
    this.sub('rax', 'rbx');
  } else if (ast.operator === '*') {
    // Signed multiplication
    // rax = rax * rbx
    this.imul('rbx');
  } else if (ast.operator === '/') {
    // Preserve 'rdx'
    this.push('rdx');

    // idiv is diving rdx:rax by rbx, therefore we need to clear rdx
    // before running it
    this.xor('rdx', 'rdx');

    // Signed division, rax = rax / rbx
    this.idiv('rbx');

    // Restore 'rdx'
    this.pop('rdx');
  } else if (ast.operator === '%') {
    // Preserve 'rdx'
    this.push('rdx');

    // Prepare to execute idiv
    this.xor('rdx', 'rdx');
    this.idiv('rbx');

    // imul puts remainedr in 'rdx'
    this.mov('rax', 'rdx');

    // Restore 'rdx'
    this.pop('rdx');
  } else {
    throw new Error('Unsupported binary operator: ' + ast.operator);
  }

  // Restore 'rbx'
  this.pop('rbx');

  // The result is in 'rax'
}

function visitUnary(ast) {
  // Visit argument and put result into 'rax'
  visit.call(this, ast.argument);

  if (ast.operator === '-') {
    // Negate argument
    this.neg('rax');
  } else {
    throw new Error('Unsupported unary operator: ' + ast.operator);
  }
}
```

You can try it by cloning it from [github][9], running `npm install` in it's
folder and then voila!

```bash
$ node ./main.js '1 + 2 * 3'
7
```

Thanks for reading up to this point! I'll talk about floating point operations
and the heap in the next blog post!

[0]: http://adambard.com/blog/top-github-languages-for-2013-so-far/
[1]: https://github.com/ariya/esprima
[2]: https://github.com/mishoo/uglifyjs2
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/SpiderMonkey/Parser_API
[4]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processor_register
[5]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_(abstract_data_type)
[6]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search
[7]: https://github.com/indutny/jit.js
[8]: https://npmjs.org/
[9]: https://github.com/indutny/jit.js/tree/master/example/basic
