# Running node.js + DTrace on FreeBSD

## Preface

Tracing node.js activity and detecting performance problems and bottlenecks
always was an important topic for many people in the community. Though, various
ways to do this was available, including: systemtap, ETW and perfctr on Windows.
The most complete tracing support was done by Joyent guys for the DTrace tool
which works best on their [Illumos][0] fork, called [SmartOS][1].

Fortunately, since 9.0 version, FreeBSD maintainers has started fixing and
tweaking their DTrace implementation (which is actually a backport from
Solaris). too Considering that FreeBSD is much easier to install and is much
more usable as a primary OS for developers, being able to do flamegraphs for
node.js on it is something that I highly desired at the time.

## What was broken

Sadly, it wasn't working out-of-the-box. After the installation of FreeBSD in a
VirtualBox has finished, I immediately tried to build and dtrace node with a
`jstack()` utility (see my previous [blog post][2] on that topic), but it did
not work out. After some struggling it became obvious that `/dev/dtrace/helper`
has pretty narrow permissions and the node, running under non-root user, wasn't
able to register itself within the system's DTrace module.

Calling `sudo chmod 666 /dev/dtrace/helper` improved the situation, but not that
much: version 0.11 of node.js was crashing, and version v0.10 was still not
registering it's ustack helper and DTrace provider (see [USDT][3] docs). This
problem was a bit tougher than the helper permissions, and took awhile to fix.

## How node interacts with DTrace

First of all, a bit of information about how node.js compiles it's DTrace
helpers and how they are used by the system. There was [some slides][4] on that
topic (how DTrace USDT interacts with kernel), but at that moment I figured it
out by reading the implementation's source.

There are two `.d` files in the node.js source tree: `src/node_provider.d`
and `src/v8ustack.d`, one is declaring a `node` DTrace USDT provider and another
is exporting an ustack helper. Both of these files are compiled with
`dtrace -G -s <file.d> -o <out.o>`, which in fact does the following thing:

1. Compile all D-language chunks into DIFs ([DTrace Intermediate Format][5]
2. Encode them in the DOF ([DTrace Object File][6]) format
3. Put them into the special `._SUNW_dof` ELF section
4. Link it to the internally-stored `drti.o`, providing `dtrace_dof_init` and
   `dtrace_dof_fini` helper functions.

These functions are called on the executable's initialization and
deinitialization (surprisingly!), each making an `ioctl()` syscall on the
`/dev/dtrace/helper`. Specifically, `dtrace_dof_init()` loads and verifies the
`._SUNW_dof` section of an ELF-file and registers it with-in the kernel.

## How I fixed it

First things first, I decided to investigate the node.js v0.11 crashes. It
was crashing on a [following line][7], so it was either an ELF symbol problem or
a DOF string problem. Initially, I found that the DOF did not contain the STRTAB
section that `dtri.o` was searching for, but it turned out to be a slightly
bigger problem. Since node.js has two separate `.d` files, it has two DOFs for
each of them in it's `._SUNW_dof` section, but the `drti.o` was loading only
one! After all I came up with a following patch:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/indutny/d3fee964995eea206fb3.js"></script>

Although, node.js v0.11 has stopped crashing after applying it to the kernel
source code and rebuilding `libdtrace`, it still wasn't registering an ustack
helper and a provider (`sudo dtrace -l` did not contain any
`node<pid>:::` probes).

While reading [FreeBSD's source code][8] further, I found an environment
variable `DTRACE_DOF_INIT_DEBUG` that helped me to take a deeper look into
what was happening for both node.js v0.10 and v0.11. After setting it to
`DTRACE_DOF_INIT_DEBUG=1` node.js has started printing following things to the
stderr:

```
dtrace DOF node: DTrace ioctl failed for DOF at 0x804c00000:
Argument list too long
```

This was totally uninformative, and I started grepping through a DTrace kernel
module with a hope to find some clues to this errors. `Argument list too long`
is a verbose description of the `E2BIG` errno, and luckily the [first place][9]
where it is used was the place that I needed to fix. Basically, for the security
purpose kernel limits the size of the DOF that could be loaded in it's memory.
This limit is set to the 128kb by default, and the node.js now has significantly
bigger ustack helper (7mb for v0.11). Instead of just raising it to a higher
value, I decided to export `sysctl` variable to make it configurable without
rebuilding the kernel. Running node again after this tweaks gave me:

```
dtrace DOF node: DTrace ioctl failed for DOF at 0x804c00000:
Invalid argument
```

This failure was even more vague, since it meant that the `EINVAL` was returned
somewhere, and there was tons of places where it could have happened. After
inserting tons of debug prints in all possible places in kernel, I have isolated
it down to [this place][10]. Indeed, both of node DOFs contained a lot of
actions and the default limit (16 * 1024) was way to small for it. Exporting
another sysctl variable has solved all problems and running node.js has finally
printed this:

```
dtrace DOF node: DTrace ioctl succeeded for DOF at 0x8052c2c2c
dtrace DOF node: DTrace ioctl succeeded for DOF at 0x804c00000
dtrace DOF node: found provider 0x8052c3000
```

Just to confirm it, I checked the `dtrace -l` output and (yikes!) it was there
too:

```
48986 node909 node ... gc-done
48987 node909 node ... gc-start
48988 node909 node ... http-client-request
48989 node909 node ... http-client-response
48990 node909 node ... http-server-request
48991 node909 node ... http-server-response
48992 node909 node ... net-server-connection
48993 node909 node ... net-socket-read
48994 node909 node ... net-socket-write
48995 node909 node ... net-stream-end
```

## How to apply all this patches

I have came up with [this instruction][11] for fixing your FreeBSD installation
to make node.js DTrace helpers work. Just a brief in-line description:

1. Apply these patches to `/usr/src`
2. Rebuild and install kernel:
   `sudo make buildkernel && sudo make installkernel`
3. Reboot `sudo shutdown -r`
4. Raise sysctl limits:
  * `sudo sysctl -w kern.dtrace.helper_actions_max=16000`
  * `sudo sysctl -w kern.dtrace.dof_maxsize=8000000`
5. Clone node.js:
   `git clone git://github.com/joyent/node && cd node && git checkout v0.10`
6. Configure it: `./configure --prefix=... --with-dtrace`
7. Build and install it: `gmake -j24 && gmake install`
8. Make DTrace device accessible to non-root users:
   `sudo chmod 666 /dev/dtrace/helper`
9. Verify that node.js DTrace probes are inserted:
   `DTRACE_DOF_INIT_DEBUG=1 /path/to/node`.

Thanks for reading this, and please let me know if any of these patches doesn't
work for you!

[0]: http://wiki.illumos.org/display/illumos/illumos+Home
[1]: http://smartos.org/
[2]: /3.dtrace-ustack-helper
[3]: http://www.solarisinternals.com/wiki/index.php/DTrace_Topics_USDT#USDT
[4]: http://www.bsdcan.org/2008/schedule/attachments/60_dtrace_bsdcan.pdf
[5]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/3ecc6f129801776dd571d69cf9a262a97ad23968/sys/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/uts/common/sys/dtrace.h#L112
[6]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/3ecc6f129801776dd571d69cf9a262a97ad23968/sys/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/uts/common/sys/dtrace.h#L570
[7]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/4d784918edbf9aefbab5ab12e4701d3104c3ff45/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/lib/libdtrace/common/drti.c#L110
[8]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/4d784918edbf9aefbab5ab12e4701d3104c3ff45/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/lib/libdtrace/common/drti.c#L52
[9]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/3ecc6f129801776dd571d69cf9a262a97ad23968/sys/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/uts/common/dtrace/dtrace.c#L11989
[10]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/3ecc6f129801776dd571d69cf9a262a97ad23968/sys/cddl/contrib/opensolaris/uts/common/dtrace/dtrace.c#L12462
[11]: https://gist.github.com/indutny/8bc5e43c02cd17cee4d3
